Magnetic field is measured using a sensor
called a magnetometer.
The most common type of solid state magnetometer
is a Hall effect sensor and it measures the
magnetic field normal to the chip surface.
It’s very useful to be able to measure the
three orthogonal components of magnetic field
vector.
So typically, three orthogonal Hall effect
sensors are packaged in to a single chip along
with all the associated electronics and typically
these have a simple serial interface that
allows them to be easily connected to a
micro-controller.
So, in order to determine the orientation
of a body in space, we use the accelerometers
to determine the downward direction, the direction
of the gravity vector.
And, we use that to determine the magnetic
field component in the horizontal plane which
we can think of as being the same as the direction
of the needle points on a traditional mechanical
compass.
To make this tangible, consider again the
example of my phone and I have attached a
body frame to the phone.
The z-axis is out of the screen, y-axis is
up the screen and the x-axis is across the
screen from left to right.
I’m going to align a magnetometer with each
of these axes and the result is called a tri-axial
magnetometer because there are three magnetometers
there.
Let’s talk now about how we process the
information from the magnetometer.
Once again, I have a world coordinate frame
denoted zero.
Once again, the z-axis is parallel to the
gravity vector.
It’s pointing straight upwards.
And, the x-axis is aligned with the magnetic
north.
In this case, I can write the magnetic field
vector with respect to the world reference
coordinate frame as B, the magnitude of the
magnetic field vector which I can look up
in a table if I know my location on the planet,
and the cosine and sine of the magnetic inclination
angle.
This vector lies in the x-z plane.
It has got no component in the y direction.
The rotational transform from the world frame
to the body frame is given in terms of the
roll, pitch and yaw angles.
We have already talked about how to determine
the roll and pitch angles from the accelerometer
measurements.
The magnetometers in the phone measure the
magnetic field in the coordinate frame B and
that allows me to write this relationship.
And, now we can solve for the yaw angle psi
and it is in terms of the roll and pitch angles
that we determined from the accelerometer
measurements.
The measured magnetic field strength, BX,
BY and BZ, the known length of the magnetic
field vector, capital B, and the known inclination
angle, capital I.
And both B and I, we can look up if we know
our location on the surface of the planet.
The magnetic field of the earth is quite weak.
Therefore, magnetometers need to be very sensitive
to magnetic field and this makes magnetometers
very susceptible to stray magnetic fields
that are created by electric currents flowing
inside electronic devices and also from electric
motors.
Roboticists building robots that operate
indoors are often frustrated by the structural
steel elements of the building which distort
the earth’s magnetic field.
There are also power cables in the walls and
there are Wi-Fi access points and equipment
closets which also create magnetic field which
can confuse robots that rely predominantly
on magnetic field sensing.
I really like this old picture of the Pioneer
ten satellite which is exploring the far reaches
of our solar system. There’s a bunch of
electronics and a rocket motor on the back
of a large dish which is pointed back at Planet
Earth.
And, on a long slender boom is the magnetometer
instrument which is sensing the local magnetic
field and they’ve position that is far away
as they can from the rest of the electronics
in the space craft.
And, that’s for exactly this reason that
magnetometer is very sensitive to stray magnetic
fields.